Add stack blockchain client tutorial (#791)
blockstack/docs: src/pages/smart-contracts/public-registry-tutorial.md

---
title: Building a public registry

> description: Learn how to read state from the blockchain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to read state from the Stacks blockchain.
```

duration: 60 minutes
experience: intermediate
tags:
  - tutorial
images:
  large: /images/pages/todo-app.svg
  sm: /images/pages/todo-app-sm.svg
---

## Introduction

> The [Stacks Blockchain API](/references/stacks-blockchain-api) is an API that helps app developers to view und use the state of the Stacks 2.0 Blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Stacks Blockchain API](/references/stacks-blockchain-api) is an API that helps app developers to view and use the state of the Stacks 2.0 Blockchain.
```

In this tutorial you will extend a to-do app to share individual lists publicly using the Stacks 2.0 blockchain. The to-do app was built in the [to-do app tutorial](/authentication/building-todo-app). The registry of shared to-do lists is implemented by a Clarity smart contract named [`todo-registry`](https://github.com/friedger/blockstack-todos/blob/tut/public-registry/contracts/todo-registry.clar). Data from this contract will be shown in the to-do app. The final app will look like this:

![What you'll be creating in this tutorial](/images/todos-public-registry.png)

By the end of this tutorial, you will...

- Have observed transactions while they are added to the blockchain.

> - Have consumed APIs to show recent transactions, data map entries and read-only functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Have consumed APIs to show recent transactions, data map entries, and read-only functions
```

> - Have experienced serializing and deserializing Clarity values

Reviewer: all or none of these should have a period at the end. I prefer periods.

## Prerequisites

### Check the Stacks 2.0 status

The Stacks 2.0 blockchain is currently in development and could experience resets and downtimes. To make sure you're not running into any challenges related to the status of the network, please open up the [Status Checker](http://status.test-blockstack.com/)
and confirm that all systems are operational. If some systems seem to have issues, it is best to wait until they are back up before you proceed with the next steps.

> Furthermore, the to-do app will interact with a smart contract deployed as `ST25GX7MJA4FGEYYH5E7EBW30BYA4VG4VC1XETXXZ.todo-registry`, please verify that this contract exists by searching for it in the sandbox of the [testnet explorer](https://testnet-explorer.blockstack.org/sandbox?tab=contract-call).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the to-do app will interact with a smart contract deployed as `ST25GX7MJA4FGEYYH5E7EBW30BYA4VG4VC1XETXXZ.todo-registry`, please verify that this contract exists by searching for it in the sandbox of the [testnet explorer](https://testnet-explorer.blockstack.org/txid/ST25GX7MJA4FGEYYH5E7EBW30BYA4VG4VC1XETXXZ.todo-registry.
```

Alternatively, you can take the [contract source code](https://github.com/friedger/blockstack-todos/blob/tut/step1/contracts/todo-registry.clar) and deploy the contract as described in the [hello world tutorial](/smart-contracts/hello-world-tutorial#step-5-deploy-the-contract). Then you just have to use your own contract address and name in this tutorial.

### Tutorials

> You should have followed the instructions of the to-do app tutorial. You should have the code ready on your local machine. It is also helpful to have a basic understanding of Clarity as explained in the counter tutorial. If you are using mocknet or a new, empty testnet you can create transactions following the tutorial about signing transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To succeed with this tutorial, you should make sure to complete the [to-do app tutorial](/authentication/building-todo-app) and have the code ready on your local machine. It is also helpful to have a basic understanding of Clarity as explained in the [counter tutorial](/smart-contracts/counter-tutorial). If you are using a mocknet or a new, empty testnet you can create transactions following the tutorial about [signing transactions](/smart-contracts/signing-transactions).
```

[@page-reference | grid]
| /authentication/building-todo-app, /smart-contracts/counter-tutorial, /smart-contracts/signing-transactions

### Check your to-do app

In your code repository of the to-do app, launch the app by running the `start` command.

```
npm run start
```

In your browser, you should see the to-do app.
![What you the to-do app looks like so far](/images/todo-list-app.png)

## Registering a public URL

> The Connect library (that is already used for authentication in the to-do app) provides also methods to create, sign and broadcast transactions to the Stacks 2.0 blockchain as explained in the signing transaction tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Connect library (that is already used for authentication in the to-do app) provides also methods to create, sign, and broadcast transactions to the Stacks 2.0 blockchain as explained in the signing signing transactions tutorial](/smart-contracts/signing-transactions).
```

### Step 1: Define contract

> The contract was already written and deployed to the blockchain. Its address and name is used often in the tutorial and therefore define some constants in the `constants.js` file by adding the following two lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contract was already written and deployed to the blockchain. Its address and name are used often in the tutorial and as such we need to define some constants in the `constants.js` file by adding the following two lines:
```

```js
// src/assets/constants.jsx
export const CONTRACT_ADDRESS = 'ST25GX7MJA4FGEYYH5E7EBW30BYA4VG4VC1XETXXZ';
export const CONTRACT_NAME = 'todo-registry';
```

### Step 2: Create registration component

The user needs a UI component to conveniently create `register` transactions on the chain.
The contract function `register` takes two arguments:

```clarity
(define-public (register (name (buff 30)) (url (buff 255))) ...)
```

Create a new file in the `src/components` folder named `PublicUrlRegistrar.js` and add the `PublicUrlRegistrar` component:

```js
// src/components/PublicUrlRegistrar.jsx
import React from 'react';
import { Text } from '@blockstack/ui';
import { useConnect } from '@blockstack/connect';
import { bufferCVFromString } from '@blockstack/stacks-transactions';
import { CONTRACT_ADDRESS, CONTRACT_NAME } from '../assets/constants';

> export const PublicUrlRegistrar = ({ userSession }) => {
>   const { doContractCall } = useConnect();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export const PublicUrlRegistrar = () => {
  const { doContractCall, userSession } = useConnect();
```

      <Text
        color="blue"
        cursor="pointer"
        fontSize={1}
        fontWeight="500"
        onClick={() => {
          // register the public URL
          register();
        }}
      >
        Register on-chain
      </Text>
    </>
  );
};
```

It is a simple button that calls `doContractCall` method of the Connect library when clicked. The method makes an api call to the Blockstack authenticator. The authenticator creates a contract call transaction that is signed by the user and then it is broadcasted to the Stacks 2.0 blockchain as explained in the [transaction signing tutorial](/smart-contracts/signing-transactions).

Note how the arguments are created using `bufferCVFromString`. There are similar methods for all other Clarity types, like `uintCV` or `trueCV`. See the [documentation](https://github.com/blockstack/stacks-transactions-js#constructing-clarity-values) of the stacks-transactions library for more details.

### Step 3: Integrate the component in the app

To use the `PublicUrlRegistrar` component, open `Sharer.jsx` and add the following lines after the `Copy Link` text component of the `Sharer` component:

```js
// src/components/Sharer.jsx

> <PublicUrlRegistrar userSession={userSession} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<PublicUrlRegistrar />
```

```js
// src/components/PublicUrlRegistrar.jsx

const [txId, setTxId] = useState();
```

and set the value in the `finished` callback

```js
// src/components/PublicUrlRegistrar.jsx

finished: data => {
    console.log(data);
    setTxId(data.txId);
    },
```

### Step 3: Connect to web socket

Add an import for `connectWebSocketClient`:

```js
import { connectWebSocketClient } from '@stacks/blockchain-api-client';
```

Then subscribe for updates of the transaction status by creating a web socket client using `connectWebSocketClient`. Add a call to `client.subscribeTxUpdates` with the transaction id `txId` and a callback function. This callback function is called whenever the transaction status changes. The subscribe process needs to be done only once at the start of the app. Therefore, add it into an effect hook that only depends on the `txId`.

```js
useEffect(() => {
  let sub;
  const subscribe = async txId => {
    const client = await connectWebSocketClient('ws://stacks-node-api.krypton.blockstack.org/');
    sub = await client.subscribeTxUpdates(txId, update => {
      console.log(update);
    });
    console.log({ client, sub });

>   };
>   subscribe(txId);
> }, [txId]);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  };
  subscribe(txId);
  return () => sub.unsubscribe();
}, [txId]);
```

  const response = await accountsApi.getAccountTransactions({
    principal: `${CONTRACT_ADDRESS}.${CONTRACT_NAME}`,
  });
  console.log(response);
}, []);
```

-> For users, the principal argument is just the user's stacks address.

### Step 3: Filter for successful contract calls

Contract calls could fail with an error, e.g. if the public url is too long. The transactions should be filtered for successful contract calls:

```js
const contractCallsOnly = r => {
  console.log(r);
  return r.tx_status === 'success' && r.tx_type === 'contract_call';
};
```

Then apply the filter to the response result and store it in the `activities` variable.
The final callback `fetchActivities` looks like this:

```js
const fetchActivities = useCallback(async () => {
  // fetch activities
  const response = await accountsApi.getAccountTransactions({
    principal: `${CONTRACT_ADDRESS}.${CONTRACT_NAME}`,
  });
  console.log(response);
  setActivities(response.results.filter(contractCallsOnly));
}, []);
```

You should now see a list of hex strings representing the transactions.

![How recent activities as json look](/images/todos-recent-activities-json.png)

### Step 4: Extract registry IDs

> For the last step, the returned details need to be decodeed and and formatted appropriately to be readable. The `register` function returns the transaction id as a result. As mentioned above, it is an unsigned int (`uint`) encoded as a hex string (`tx_result.hex`) like `0x0100000000000000000000000000000001`. The method `hexToCV` decodes the string and creates a `ClarityValue` object. In this case it is an object of type `UIntCV`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the last step, the returned details need to be decoded and and formatted appropriately to be readable. The `register` function returns the transaction id as a result. As mentioned above, it is an unsigned int (`uint`) encoded as a hex string (`tx_result.hex`) like `0x0100000000000000000000000000000001`. The method `hexToCV` decodes the string and creates a `ClarityValue` object. In this case it is an object of type `UIntCV`.
```

The `todo-registry` contract defines a read-only function `owner-of?` that returns the owner of a registry entry and a data map for details about entries:

```clarity
(define-read-only (owner-of (registration-id uint)) ... )

(define-map registry
  ((registry-id uint))
  (
    (name (buff 30))
    (url (buff 255))
  )
)
```

Let's add the owner information and the details for the first ever registered to-do list (with `registry-id` 1) to the `RecentActivities` component. The `SmartContractsApi` of the client library provides methods to read these data from the blockchain.

### Step 1: Add state variable for first registration

At first, add a new state variable `firstRegistration`.

```js
// src/components/RecentActvities.jsx

const [firstRegistration, setFirstRegistration] = useState();
```

Then, define a new callback `fetchRegistration` that will contain the calls to the blockchain and update the state variable. Add the following code after the `fetchRegistration` callback and update the effect hook.

```js
const fetchRegistration = useCallback(async () => {
  // fetch newest registration
  // fetch owner
  // fetch public URL and name
});

useEffect(() => {

>   fetchActivities();
>   fetchRegistration();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Promise.all([fetchActivities(), fetchRegistration()];
```

Author: @aulneau What does the `void` do in front of `Promise.all`?

Reviewer: @friedger https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/blob/master/packages/eslint-plugin/docs/rules/no-floating-promises.md#ignorevoid

> This allows you to stop the rule reporting promises consumed with void operator. This can be a good way to explicitly mark a promise as intentionally not awaited.

```

### Step 2: Query owner of the first to-do list

To query the read-only functions of the smart contract, a `SmartContractsApi` object needs to be created, in the same way as the `AccountsApi` object.

```js
const smartContractsApi = new SmartContractsApi();
```

Use that api object in the `fetchRegistration` callback to call the read-only method `owner-of?` like this:

```js
const fetchRegistration = useCallback(async () => {
  const ownerResponse = await smartContractsApi.callReadOnlyFunction({
    contractAddress: CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
    contractName: CONTRACT_NAME,
    functionName: 'owner-of?',
    readOnlyFunctionArgs: ReadOnlyFunctionArgsFromJSON({
      sender: CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
      arguments: [cvToHex(uintCV(1))],
    }),
  });
  console.log(ownerResponse);
});
```

The arguments of the read-only function are provided as an array of hex encoded `ClarityValue`s.
The helper method `cvToHex` converts a `ClarityValue` into a hex encoded string. It is the reverse function of `hexToCV` that was used to decode the transaction response.
The `sender` can be any stacks address and is not relevant for the `owner-of?` function.

### Step 3: Deserialize the response

> A read-only function call returns a response object with an `okay` property and if the call was okay, it contains a `result` property with the hex encoded Clarity value. Otherwise the `cause` property describes the error. The helper methods `hexToCV` is used again to decode the result. The result is an optional address of type `SomeCV`. It has a property `value` that contains the owner address. Using `cvToString` with `ownerCV.value` returns the address as a string:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A read-only function call returns a response object with an `okay` property and it's `true`, it contains a `result` property with the hex encoded Clarity value. Otherwise the `cause` property describes the error. The helper methods `hexToCV` is used again to decode the result. The result is an optional address of type `SomeCV`. It has a property `value` that contains the owner address. Using `cvToString` with `ownerCV.value` returns the address as a string:
```

```js
const key = cvToHex(tupleCV({ 'registry-id': uintCV(1) }));
```

With the encoded key, add the following lines to the `fetchRegistry` callback

```js
const mapEntryResponse = await smartContractsApi.getContractDataMapEntry({
  contractAddress: CONTRACT_ADDRESS,
  contractName: CONTRACT_NAME,
  mapName: 'registry',
  key,
});
console.log({ mapEntryResponse });
```

### Step 5: Deserialized data map entry

The response object has a property `data` that contains the hex encoded result. If the key was invalid the result is an object of type `OptionalNone`. Otherwise, the result is of type `OptionalSome` and its `value` property contains the map entry. It is always a tuple (type `TupleCV`). Its `data` property contains the registered name and public url as `ClarityValue`s.

Therefore the deserialization of the result looks like this:

```js

> const optionalMapEntry = hexToCV(mapEntryResponse.data);
> if (optionalMapEntry.type === ClarityType.OptionalSome) {
>   const mapEntryCV = optionalMapEntry.value;
>   const registryData = mapEntryCV.data;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const optionalMapEntry = hexToCV(mapEntryResponse.data);

if (optionalMapEntry.type === ClarityType.OptionalSome) {
  const mapEntryCV = optionalMapEntry.value;
  const registryData = mapEntryCV.data;
}
```

```

Add this to the `fetchRegistry` callback and then update the react state variable with all the gathered data. Instead of using `cvToString` you can also access the buffer value directly and convert it to a string. This is useful for the `url` because `cvToString` put the string in quotes.

```js
setFirstRegistration({
  owner,
  name: cvToString(registryData.name),
  url: registryData.url.buffer.toString(),
});
```

### Step 6: Display registry entry

Update the UI to display the data of the first registry entry.

```jsx
{
  firstRegistration && (
    <>
      <Text fontWeight="500" display="block" mb={0} fontSize={0}>
        First registration in 'Public To-Do List registry' by
      </Text>
      <Text fontSize={2}>
        <a href={firstRegistration.url}>{firstRegistration.name}</a>{' '}
      </Text>
      <Text fontSize={0}>using address {firstRegistration.owner}</Text>
      <br />
    </>
  );
}
```

> => Congratulations! You just managed to call read-only functions and map entries from the public registry - without managing a server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=> Congratulations! You just called read-only functions and map entries from the public registry — without managing a server.
```
